kaṃso'tha nāradagirā vrajavāsinaṃ tvā-
mākarṇya dīrṇahṛdaya: sa hi gāndineyam |
āhūya kārmukamakhacchalato bhavanta-
mānetumenamahinodahināthaśāyin ||1||
kaṃsa:-atha	Kansa then
nārada-girā	from Naarada's speech
vrajavāsinaṃ tvāṃ	(who was) residing in Vraja, Thee
ākarṇya	hearing (to be Naaraayana)
dīrṇa-hṛdaya:	with a fearful heart
sa hi	he (Kansa) indeed
gāndineyam	the son of Gaandini (Akrura)
āhūya	called
kārmuka-makha:-chalata:	(and in) the bow festival (sacrifice) pretext
bhavantam-ānetum-	Thee to bring
enam-ahinot-	him (Akrura) sent
ahināthaśāyin	O Lord resting on the king of serpents
Then when Kansa came to know from Naarada that, Thou, O Lord! resting on the serpent king! Were residing in Vraja, his heart was full of fear. He called for Akrur, the son of Gaandini, and sent him for Thee under the pretext of inviting Thee to witness the bow worshipping festival.
akrūra eṣa bhavadaṃghriparaścirāya
tvaddarśanākṣamamanā: kṣitipālabhītyā |
tasyājñayaiva punarīkṣitumudyatastvā-
mānandabhāramatibhūritaraṃ babhāra ||2||
akrūra eṣa	this Akrura
bhavat-aṃghri-para:-	Thy feet devoted to
cirāya	since long
tvat-darśana-akṣama-manā:	Thy seeing impossible, thinking
kṣitipāla-bhītyā	because of the king's (Kansa's) fear
tasya-ājñayā-eva	by his (king's) orders only
puna:-	again
īkṣitum-udyata:-tvām-	to see (Thee) preparing, Thee
ānanda-bhāram-ati-	with the joy full and intense
bhūritaraṃ	very highly
babhāra	felt
This Akrura for long was Thy devotee. Owing to the fear of Kansa he felt it was impossible to see Thee. Now he was overwhelmed with intense joy when by the order of the king himself he was preparing to see and meet Thee.
so'yaṃ rathena sukṛtī bhavato nivāsaṃ
gacchan manorathagaṇāṃstvayi dhāryamāṇān |
āsvādayan muhurapāyabhayena daivaṃ
samprārthayan pathi na kiñcidapi vyajānāt ||3||
sa-ayaṃ	he this
rathena	by a chariot
sukṛtī	the doer of meritorious deeds
bhavata: nivāsaṃ	to Thy abode
gacchan	(while) going
manoratha-gaṇān-	thoughts innumerable
tvayi dhāryamāṇān	in Thee placing
āsvādayan muhu:-	(and) experiencing again and again
apāya-bhayena daivaṃ	obstacles fear, to God
samprārthayan pathi	fervently praying, on the way
na kiñcit-api	did not anything at all
vyajānat	notice
This doer of meritorious deed, Akrura, travelled in a chariot to Thy abode. On the way his innumerable thoughts were centered around Thee and so he again and again experienced Thy presence. He feared and fervently prayed for the removal of all possible obstacles to this meeting with Thee and so he did not notice anything on the way.
drakṣyāmi vedaśatagītagatiṃ pumāṃsaṃ
sprakṣyāmi kiṃsvidapi nāma pariṣvajeyam |
kiṃ vakṣyate sa khalu māṃ kvanu vīkṣita: syā-
ditthaṃ nināya sa bhavanmayameva mārgam ||4||
drakṣyāmi	will see
veda-śata-gīta-gatiṃ	in the Vedas (of whom) hundreds of hymns (are sung) that goal
pumāṃsaṃ	the Great One
sprakṣyāmi	will touch
kiṃsvit-api	slightly even
nāma pariṣvajeyam	will at all embrace
kiṃ vakṣyate	what will he say
sa khalu māṃ	he indeed to me
kvanu vīkṣita: syāt	where seen will he be
itthaṃ nināya	in this manner, carrying along
sa bhavanmayam-eva	he (Akrura) immersed in Thee only
mārgam	in the way (went)
All along the way he was immersed in Thy thoughts alone - 'Shall I be blessed to meet the Supreme Being who is the subject of all Vedic hymns? Will I be able to touch him even slightly? Will he embrace me? What will he say to me? Where will I see him?' He went along the way thinking in this manner.
bhūya: kramādabhiviśan bhavadaṃghripūtaṃ
vṛndāvanaṃ haraviriñcasurābhivandyam |
ānandamagna iva lagna iva pramohe
kiṃ kiṃ daśāntaramavāpa na paṅkajākṣa ||5||
bhūya: kramāt-	again gradually
abhiviśan	entering
bhavat-aṃghri-pūtam	by Thy feet purified
vṛndāvanam	Vrindaavana
har-viriñca-sura-	by Shiva Brahma and other gods
abhivandyam	honoured
ānanda-magna iva	in bliss immersed as if
lagna iva pramohe	under as if a spell
kiṃ kiṃ	what what
daśāntaram-	states (of ecstasy)
avāpa na	attain not (he)
paṅkajākṣa	O Lotus Eyed One!
O Lotus Eyed One! He gradually entered Vrindaavana which is sanctified by Thy feet and revered by Shiva, Brahma and other gods. As Akrura approached Vrindaavana he was as if immersed in bliss or was under a spell. What states of ecstasy did he not attain!
paśyannavandata bhavadvihṛtisthalāni
pāṃsuṣvaveṣṭata bhavaccaraṇāṅkiteṣu |
kiṃ brūmahe bahujanā hi tadāpi jātā
evaṃ tu bhaktitaralā viralā: parātman ||6||
paśyan-avandata	seeing, he prostrated
bhavat-vihṛti-sthalāni	Thy sporting places
pāṃsuṣu-aveṣṭata	in the dust rolled
bhavat-caraṇa-aṅkiteṣu	by Thy feet (which was) marked
kiṃ brūmahe	what shall I say
bahujanā hi	many people indeed
tadāpi jātā	at that time also were born
evaṃ tu	like this, but
bhaktitaralā:	devotees intense
viralā:	were few
parātman	O Lord!
O Lord! Coming to the places where Thou sported, he prostrated. He rolled in the dust which had imprints of Thy feet. O what shall I say! His state is beyond description. At that time also many devotees were born but such ardent devotees were few indeed.
sāyaṃ sa gopabhavanāni bhavaccaritra-
gītāmṛtaprasṛtakarṇarasāyanāni |
paśyan pramodasariteva kilohyamāno
gacchan bhavadbhavanasannidhimanvayāsīt ||7||
sāyaṃ sa	at dusk, he (Akrura)
gopa-bhavanāni	(from) the Gopa houses
bhavat-caritra-	Thy doings
gīta-amṛta-prasṛta-	sung (like) nectar flowing
karṇa-rasāyanāni	for the ears, feast (like)
paśyan	seeing
pramoda-saritā-iva	bliss river like
kila-uhyamāna:	indeed carried away
gacchan bhavat-	going, Thy
bhavana-sannidhim-	abodes near to
anvayāsīt	reached
Akrura reached the vicinity of Thy residence by dusk. He passed by the houses of the Gopas from where flowed the soothing to the ear, nectar like strains sung about Thy sportive deed. Seeing this he was as though carried away and caught in the current of a river of bliss and spiritual joy.
tāvaddadarśa paśudohavilokalolaṃ
bhaktottamāgatimiva pratipālayantam |
bhūman bhavantamayamagrajavantamanta-
rbrahmānubhūtirasasindhumivodvamantam ||8||
tāvat-dadarśa	then (he) saw
paśu-doha-	the cows milked
viloka-lolaṃ	watching eagerly
bhakta-uttama-āgatim-	the great devotee,s coming
iva pratipālayantam	as if awaiting
bhūman	O Infinite Lord!
bhavantam-ayam-	Thee, this (Akrura)
agrajavantam-	with (Thy) elder brother (saw)
anta:-brahma-anubhūti-	(his own) internal Brahmic experiences'
rasa-sindhum-iva-udvamantam	nectar ocean as if flowing (outwardly)
O Infinite Lord! Then Akrura saw Thee with Thy elder brother Balaraam, eagerly watching the milking of the cows, and it seemed like Thou were awaiting the arrival of a great devotee (Akrura himself). It was as if Akrura's internal Brahmic experience was flowing outwardly like a nectar ocean personified as Thee.
sāyantanāplavaviśeṣaviviktagātrau
dvau pītanīlarucirāmbaralobhanīyau |
nātiprapañcadhṛtabhūṣaṇacāruveṣau
mandasmitārdravadanau sa yuvāṃ dadarśa ||9||
sāyantana-āplava	the evening bath
viśeṣa-vivikta-	well cleaned
gātrau dvau	bodied both (in)
pīta-nīla-	yellow and blue
rucira-ambara-	beautiful garments
lobhanīyau	attractive
na-ati-prapañca-	not very clustered
dhṛta-bhūṣaṇa	wearing ornaments
cāru-veṣau	charming appearance
mand-smita-	soft smiling
ārdra-vadanau	gentle faced
sa	he (Akrura)
yuvāṃ dadarśa	Thou two saw
Akrura saw Thee and Balaraam, both neat and tidy after the evening bath, dressed in beautiful yellow and blue garments, wearing a few ornaments and looking charming in appearance. A soft smile played on Thy gentle faces.
dūrādrathātsamavaruhya namantamena-
mutthāpya bhaktakulamaulimathopagūhan |
harṣānmitākṣaragirā kuśalānuyogī
pāṇiṃ pragṛhya sabalo'tha gṛhaṃ ninetha ||10||
dūrāt-rathāt-	from afar, from the chariot
samavaruhya	getting down
namantam-enam-	(who was) prostrating, him
utthāpya	lifting up
bhaktakula-mauliṃ-	the devotee clan's crown (Akrura)
atha-upagūhan	then embracing
harṣāt-	joyfully
mita-akṣara-girā	with few words speech
kuśala-anuyogī	welfare enquiring
pāṇiṃ pragṛhya	(his) hands taking
sabala:- atha	with Balaraam, then
gṛhaṃ ninetha	to the house led
The crown of the devotees Akrura got down from the chariot. Thou lifted him up in great joy as he prostrated before Thee. Thou embraced him and in a few words enquired about his wellbeing. Holding his hand Thou and Balaraam led him to Thy house.
nandena sākamamitādaramarcayitvā
taṃ yādavaṃ taduditāṃ niśamayya vārtām |
gopeṣu bhūpatinideśakathāṃ nivedya
nānākathābhiriha tena niśāmanaiṣī: ||11||
nandena sākam-	Nanda, along with (Thou)
ati-ādaram-	very respectfully
arcayitvā	honoured
taṃ yādavaṃ	him, the Yaadava (Akrura)
tat-uditāṃ	by him said
niśamayya vārtām	hearing the message
gopeṣu	to the Gopas
bhūpati-nideśa-kathāṃ	the king's command news
nivedya	communicating
nānā-kathābhi:-	by various talks
iha tena	here with him
niśām-anaiṣī:	the night (Thou) spend
With Nanda Gopa Thou very respectfully honoured the Yaadava Akrura and listened to the message of his mission. Thou communicated to the Gopas about the news of the king's command. That night Thou spent conversing with Akrura on various matters.
candrāgṛhe kimuta candrabhagāgṛhe nu
rādhāgṛhe nu bhavane kimu maitravinde |
dhūrto vilambata iti pramadābhiruccai-
rāśaṅkito niśi marutpuranātha pāyā: ||12||
candrā gṛhe	in Chandraa's house
kimuta	or
candrabhagā gṛhe	in Chandrabhaagaa's house
nu	is it so
rādhā gṛhe nu	or in Raadhaa's house is it
kimu maitravinde	or in Mitravrindaa's
dhūrta: vilambate	the rascal (Krishna) is tarrying
iti pramadābhi:-	thus by the ladies
uccai: āśaṅkita:	greatly suspected
niśi	in the night
marutpuranātha	O Lord of Guruvaayur!
pāyā:	protect me
That night Thou failed to meet the Gopikas. The ladies suspected that the rascal that Thou were may be tarrying in the house of Chandra, or Chandrabhaagaa, or Raadhaa or Mitravrindaa, in the night. O Lord of Guruvaayur! Protect me.